THERE ARE SOME
GREAT QUESTIONS
THAT HAVE INTRIGUED
AND HAUNTED US
SINCE THE DAWN
OF HUMANITY.
WHAT IS
OUT THERE?
HOW DID WE
GET HERE?
WHAT IS THE
WORLD MADE OF?
THE STORY OF OUR SEARCH
TO ANSWER THESE QUESTIONS
IS THE STORY
OF SCIENCE.
OF ALL HUMAN
ENDEAVORS,
SCIENCE HAS HAD THE
GREATEST IMPACT ON OUR LIVES,
ON HOW WE SEE THE WORLD,
ON HOW WE SEE OURSELVES.
ITS IDEAS, ITS ACHIEVEMENTS,
ITS RESULTS ARE ALL AROUND US.
BUT THE STORY OF SCIENCE
HAS BEEN SHAPED AS MUCH
BY WHAT'S OUTSIDE THE
LABORATORY AS INSIDE.
POWER AND PASSION,
RIVALRY AND SHEER CHANCE
HAVE ALL PLAYED
SIGNIFICANT ROLES.
THIS IS THE STORY OF
HOW HISTORY MADE SCIENCE
AND HOW SCIENCE
MADE HISTORY.
THIS TIME, A
QUESTION WE'VE ASKED
SINCE HUMANS FIRST
STARED AT THE HEAVENS.
WHAT IS OUT THERE?
TODAY, YOU HAVE TO DRIVE
INTO THE WILDERNESS
TO SEE THE NIGHT
SKY IN ALL ITS GLORY.
SINCE THE DAWN OF TIME
WE'VE BEEN MESMERIZED
BY ITS BEAUTY
AND MYSTERY.
FROM DOWN HERE ALL LOOKS
QUIET, STILL AND PEACEFUL.
YET WE ARE IN FACT
ON A LARGE ROCK
SPINNING AROUND ITS OWN AXIS
AT OVER 1,500 KM AN HOUR.
WE, AND OUR COMPANION
THE MOON, ARE TRAVELING
IN A GIANT LOOP AROUND THE
SUN AT 100,000 KM AN HOUR.
AND WE'RE JUST ONE
PART OF THE GALAXY
MADE OF OVER
100 BILLION STARS.
TODAY WE KNOW OUR
UNIVERSE IS A PLACE OF
EXTRAORDINARY WONDER AND
UNIMAGINABLE STRANGENESS.
IT'S SO HARD
TO UNDERSTAND
THAT IT'S NOT SURPRISING THAT
FOR MOST OF OUR HISTORY
WE HAD A VERY DIFFERENT
VIEW OF WHAT'S OUT THERE.
THIS IS THE STORY
OF HOW WE DISCOVERED
WHAT WE KNOW ABOUT THIS
BIZARRE AND DAZZLING UNIVERSE.
OUR STORY
BEGINS IN PRAGUE
IN THE OPENING DAYS
OF THE 17TH CENTURY.
A DEFINING MOMENT IN
THE HISTORY OF SCIENCE.
IT WAS HERE THAT THE
STORY OF OUR PLANET
WAS CHANGED FOREVER
BY THREE CRUCIAL FORCES:
PEOPLE WITH
DARING IDEAS...
COLLECTORS
OF EVIDENCE...
AND SOMEONE PREPARED
TO PAY FOR IT ALL.
THE PLACE WAS THE COURT OF THE
HOLY ROMAN EMPEROR, RUDOLF II.
RUDOLF WAS HUNGRY
FOR NEW IDEAS,
FRESH DISCOVERIES
ABOUT THE HEAVENS,
AND SO HE
BROUGHT TO PRAGUE
THE WORLD'S
GREATEST ASTRONOMER
- AN ECCENTRIC DANISH
NOBLEMAN CALLED TYCHO BRAHE.
ALLAN CHAPMAN HAS
BEEN FASCINATED BY
TYCHO'S LIFE AND WORK
SINCE HE WAS A BOY.
HE WAS HAUGHTY AND POWERFUL,
IMMENSELY CLEVER.
HE WAS AN ARISTOCRAT
TO HIS FINGERTIPS
AND HE'D BEEN
ABDUCTED AS A BABY.
SO HE REALLY HAS EVERY
EXOTIC TRAIT ABOUT HIM.
SCIENCE RELIES ON
EVIDENCE AND TYCHO WAS
AN EXTRAORDINARY
EVIDENCE GATHERER.
HE BUILT HIS OWN
OBSERVATORY
AND FILLED IT WITH THE BEST
ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTS.
ALLAN HAS RECREATED THE MOST
FAMOUS: TYCHO'S QUADRANT.
FOR ASTRONOMERS OF THE TIME,
OBSERVING THE HEAVENS
MEANT PEERING AT THE
STARS WITH THE NAKED EYE.
IT WAS PAINSTAKING
AND DIFFICULT WORK.
YOU'D USE THAT CENTRAL
PEG AS YOUR FRONT SIGHT
AND INSIDE HERE ARE A
PAIR OF LITTLE SLITS.
YOU OBSERVE A STAR THROUGH
THE TOP PART OF THE SLIT,
THEN THROUGH THE
BOTTOM ON THE TOP
AND THE BOTTOM
OF THAT PEG.
AND THEN YOU'D NOTICE
THE ANGLE UNDER HERE
AND THAT WOULD GIVE
YOU THE VERTICAL ANGLE
OF THE OBJECT
ABOVE THE HORIZON.
AND IF YOU COLLECTED
A LOT OF THIS DATA,
AND TYCHO COLLECTED
THOUSANDS AND THOUSANDS
OF SUCH OBSERVATIONS
OVER 20 YEARS,
THAT'S THE BASIS
OF A STAR CATALOG.
TYCHO COLLECTED
ENORMOUS QUANTITIES OF DATA.
AND WHAT'S MORE, IT WAS
THE MOST ACCURATE EVER.
TYCHO'S INSTRUMENTS
WERE THE LATEST
IN A LONG LINE
OF DEVICES.
THEY AND THE CRAFTSMEN
WHO BUILT THEM
PLAY A CRUCIAL ROLE IN
THE STORY OF ASTRONOMY.
THE EVIDENCE TYCHO GATHERED
WAS THE FIRST STAGE
IN UNDERMINING A BELIEF THAT
HAD LASTED OVER 2,000 YEARS.
THE STORY OF
WESTERN SCIENCE
HAS ITS ROOTS IN
ANCIENT GREECE.
LIKE MANY EARLY CIVILIZATIONS,
THE GREEKS BELIEVED
THE EARTH WAS AT THE
CENTER OF THE COSMOS.
IT WAS OBVIOUS.
EVERY DAY THE SUN
ROSE AND SET AROUND US.
THEY CREATED A
SIMPLE, ELEGANT VIEW
OF HOW THE
UNIVERSE WORKED.
THE SUN, MOON
AND PLANETS
REVOLVED AROUND
THE EARTH IN CIRCLES...
FOR THEM A PERFECT
AND DIVINE SHAPE.
BUT IT DIDN'T WORK OUT
TO BE QUITE THAT SIMPLE.
A CHANCE DISCOVERY
MADE A CENTURY AGO
GIVES US A STRIKING INSIGHT
INTO THE GREEK COSMOS.
IN 1900 SOME GREEK SPONGE
DIVERS WERE FORCED TO
TAKE SHELTER NEAR A SMALL
ISLAND CALLED ANTIKYTHERA.
WHEN THE STORM HAD
BLOWN OUT THEY THOUGHT
"THIS IS WATER
WE DON'T KNOW.
LET'S SEE WHAT'S ON THE BOTTOM.
MIGHT BE SPONGES HERE"
AND THEY SENT
A MAN DOWN.
BUT THIS WAS NO
ORDINARY DIVE.
HE CAME UP SOME MINUTES
LATER BABBLING ABOUT
NAKED MEN ON
HORSES ON THE SEABED.
WHAT ON EARTH
IS GOING ON?
WAS HE JUST ILL OR WAS THERE
SOMETHING REALLY DOWN THERE?
THERE WAS SOMETHING
DOWN THERE.
A WRECKED SHIP
FROM 2,000 YEARS AGO.
AND AMONGST ITS CARGO THERE
WAS SOMETHING ASTONISHING.
IT'S BECOME KNOWN AS THE
ANTIKYTHERA MECHANISM...
A BEAUTIFULLY CRAFTED SYSTEM
OF BRONZE WHEELS AND COGS.
NOTHING THIS SOPHISTICATED
WOULD BE MADE AGAIN
FOR OVER A
THOUSAND YEARS.
ITS EXACT CONSTRUCTION
AND PURPOSE
HAS BEEN AN
INTRIGUING PUZZLE.
MICHAEL WRIGHT FELL IN LOVE WITH
THE MECHANISM AT FIRST SIGHT
AND HAS SPENT 20 YEARS
TRYING TO DECIPHER IT.
WORKING OUT WHAT'S THERE
IN THE ORIGINAL INSTRUMENT
AND THEN AGAIN WORKING
OUT HOW TO COMPLETE IT,
I FEEL I'D REALLY LIKE TO HAVE
KNOWN THE MAN WHO MADE THIS.
IT'S BEEN A FASCINATING
ROLLER COASTER RIDE
TRYING TO WORK OUT
THE ROUTE HE TOOK.
I WISH I WAS HALF AS CLEVER AS
I THINK THE ORIGINAL MAN WAS.
MICHAEL'S MODEL IS
HIS INTERPRETATION
OF HOW THE BRONZE
FRAGMENTS MIGHT HAVE WORKED.
WE HAVE
EIGHT HANDS...
THE LONG HAND SHOWS THE DAY
OF THE YEAR ON THE OUTER RING.
THE OTHER ONES SHOW THE
PLACE IN THE SKY OF THE MOON,
THE SUN, AND THE FIVE PLANETS
THAT THE ANCIENTS KNEW ABOUT:
MERCURY, VENUS, MARS,
JUPITER AND SATURN.
THIS MODEL IS A
REPRESENTATION
OF THE UNIVERSE AS
THE GREEKS KNEW IT
WITH THE SUN,
MOON AND PLANETS
GOING AROUND THE EARTH
IN PERFECT CIRCLES.
AND IT'S REMARKABLY
SOPHISTICATED.
MARS...
JUPITER...
THAT'S SATURN...
ALL OUT IN A LUMP.
BUT WHAT'S INTRIGUING ABOUT
THIS MODEL IS THAT IT SUGGESTS
THE GREEKS HAD STUMBLED
UPON A TRICKY PROBLEM...
ONE THAT ONLY
APPEARS IF YOU BELIEVE
THE EARTH IS THE
CENTER OF THE UNIVERSE.
FROM TIME TO TIME THE
PLANETS APPEAR TO STOP
AGAINST THE
BACKGROUND OF STARS.
IN GENERAL YOU
SEE THEM MOVING
A LITTLE FURTHER
EAST EVERY NIGHT.
BUT THERE COME TIMES
WITH EACH OF THE PLANETS
WHEN THEY SEEM TO STOP
AMONGST THE STARS AND GO
WESTWARD FOR A MOMENT,
FOR A PERIOD OF DAYS,
AND THEN THEY STOP AGAIN
AND GO BACK EASTWARD
AND THIS INSTRUMENT
REPLICATES THAT BEHAVIOR.
THE FACT THAT THE PLANETS
APPEAR TO GO BACKWARDS
IN THE SKY MEANT THE GREEK
MODEL OF THE HEAVENS
GOT MUCH MORE
COMPLICATED.
THEY DIDN'T ABANDON THE PERFECT
CIRCLES AROUND THE EARTH,
BUT INSTEAD THEY ADDED
MORE, WELL OVER 40,
ALLOWING THE PLANETS
TO SPIRAL ACROSS THE SKY.
A UNIVERSE OF PERFECT
CIRCLES WAS ONE OF THE MOST
ENDURING IDEAS
IN HUMAN HISTORY.
IT TOOK ROOT IN THE ARAB WORLD
AFTER THE THE COLLAPSE OF ROME.
IT BECAME EMBEDDED
IN THE CATHOLIC FAITH.
DISLODGING IT WOULD NEED
MORE THAN ACCURATE EVIDENCE.
IT WOULD TAKE A RADICAL
SHIFT IN THINKING
AND THAT WAS TRIGGERED BY
A GREAT FORCE OF HISTORY:
THE REFORMATION.
IT STARTED AS A MOVEMENT TO
REFORM THE CATHOLIC CHURCH
BUT SOON SPLIT
EUROPE IN TWO.
THE CONFLICT TURNED VIOLENT
AND PEOPLE OF THE "WRONG"
FAITH WERE PERSECUTED
OR EVEN EXECUTED.
RELIGIOUS TRUTH
CAME UNDER FIRE
AND AUTHORITY WAS
OPEN TO QUESTION.
AND AS REFUGEES
SPREAD ACROSS EUROPE,
ONE OF THEM TOOK
REFUGE IN PRAGUE.
TYCHO THE STARGAZER
GAINED AN ASSISTANT.
SLIGHTLY BUILT, SICKLY AND
EXTREMELY SHORTSIGHTED,
JOHANNES KEPLER WAS
AN UNLIKELY ASTRONOMER.
HIS STRENGTH WAS AN
EXTRAORDINARY GIFT
FOR MATHEMATICS.
HE WAS OBSESSED WITH GEOMETRY
AND BEAUTY IN THE HEAVENS.
AND HE CARRIED OUT HIS
OBSESSION IN A SURPRISING WAY.
KEPLER WAS
AN ASTROLOGER.
KEPLER'S CONNECTION WITH
ASTROLOGY IS SIGNIFICANT.
EVERYONE UNDERSTOOD THAT THE
POSITION OF THE SUN AND MOON
WENT WITH THE SEASONS AND
THE CYCLE OF DAY AND NIGHT.
SO IT MADE SENSE THAT THE
PLANETS AFFECTED LIFE TOO.
CHARTING POSITIONS IN THE ZODIAC
NEEDED ACCURATE OBSERVATIONS
AND PRECISE MATHEMATICS
AND BOTH OF THESE
WERE ALSO VITAL TO THE
SCIENCE OF ASTRONOMY.
YOU COULD CALL SOMEONE AN
ASTRONOMER AND IT MIGHT MEAN
THAT THEY WERE AN
ASTROLOGER AND VICE VERSA.
ASTRONOMY IS THE ACTUAL
MAPPING OF THE HEAVENS,
BUT ASTROLOGY, BECAUSE IT IS
INTERESTED IN THE CONNECTIONS
BETWEEN THE EVENTS IN THE
HEAVENS AND LIFE ON EARTH,
BECOMES AN IMPETUS FOR
DOING THE ASTRONOMY AT ALL.
IN THE COURT OF RUDOLF
AND OTHER PRINCES LIKE HIM,
ASTROLOGERS LIKE KEPLER
PLAYED A CRUCIAL ROLE
IN THE RUNNING
OF THE STATE.
IN A LOT OF WAYS IT'S NOT
DISSIMILAR TO THE WAY WE LOOK
AT ECONOMIC ADVISERS TODAY
OR EVEN DEFENSE ADVISORS.
THEY'RE ALL GIVING THE RULER
CERTAIN KINDS OF INFORMATION
AND THE ASTROLOGER
WOULD DO THAT AS WELL.
THE FACT THAT PRINCES LIKE
RUDOLF BELIEVED IN ASTROLOGY
MEANT THEY WERE PREPARED
TO PAY FOR DETAILED STUDIES
OF THE PLANETS
AND STARS.
BUT FOR KEPLER ASTROLOGY WAS
MORE THAN A WAY OF MAKING MONEY.
IT HAD A PROFOUND
INFLUENCE ON HIM.
HE DOESN'T SEE THE
HEAVENS AS A DEAD THING.
PLANETS AS CHUNKS OF ROCK.
HE THINKS OF THE HEAVENS
IN SOME WAY AS DIVINE.
IN PRAGUE THERE
WAS NOW A POWERFUL
COMBINATION
OF FORCES:
AN OBSESSION WITH THE HEAVENS
FUNDED BY THE EMPEROR...
EVIDENCE GATHERED
BY TYCHO BRAHE...
MATHEMATICAL IDEAS
FROM JOHANNES KEPLER...
AND THE INTELLECTUAL TURMOIL
UNLEASHED BY THE REFORMATION.
FROM THESE FORCES EMERGED
A NEW MODEL OF THE UNIVERSE...
ONE WHICH PLACED NOT THE EARTH
BUT THE SUN AT THE CENTER.
IT WAS NOT A NEW IDEA BUT IT
HAD RECENTLY BEEN REDISCOVERED
BY A POLISH CLERIC CALLED
NICHOLAS COPERNICUS.
COPERNICUS IS OFTEN
HAILED AS THE MAN
WHO CHANGED OUR
VISION OF THE UNIVERSE.
BUT IN FACT HE WAS ONLY TRYING
TO SIMPLIFY THE GREEK SYSTEM.
NOW KEPLER BEGAN TO FOCUS ON
THE MOVEMENT OF THE PLANETS.
THIS IS WHAT HE
WAS WRESTLING WITH:
HIS OWN DRAWING OF HOW
MARS MOVES THROUGH THE SKY.
HE THOUGHT THIS ANCIENT
PROBLEM COULD BE SOLVED
WHILST ALSO KEEPING THE
CIRCULAR ORBITS AROUND THE SUN.
ARMED WITH TYCHO'S DATA, HE SET
OUT TO PROVE IT MATHEMATICALLY.
IT WAS
TEDIOUS WORK.
HUNDREDS OF
CALCULATIONS
SPREAD OVER MORE
THAN FIVE YEARS.
HE VARIED THE SPEED
OF THE PLANETS.
HE SHIFTED THE POSITION
OF THE CENTER OF THE ORBIT.
BUT HE COULDN'T MAKE
CIRCULAR MOVEMENTS
FIT TYCHO'S
OBSERVATIONS.
AND SO HE TOOK
A RADICAL STEP.
HE DROPPED THE DIVINE
PERFECT CIRCLES
AND TRIED ANOTHER
SHAPE: AN ELLIPSE.
IT WORKED. IT
MATCHED THE DATA.
KEPLER HAD FOUND
THE TRUE SHAPE
OF THE ORBIT
OF THE PLANETS.
IN 1609 HE PUBLISHED.
THE ANCIENT MODEL OF THE
UNIVERSE SHOULD HAVE
COME TUMBLING DOWN
BUT NOTHING HAPPENED.
BEING RIGHT
WAS NOT ENOUGH.
FOR A 2,000 YEAR OLD
BELIEF TO BE OVERTHROWN
REQUIRED SOMETHING
FAR MORE POWERFUL.
ASTRONOMY WOULD
HAVE TO GO TABLOID.
THE STORY OF
WHAT'S OUT THERE
NOW MOVES SOUTH
ACROSS THE ALPS.
RENAISSANCE ITALY
WAS AWASH WITH MONEY
AND HUNGRY
FOR NOVELTIES.
IT WAS THE PERFECT WORLD FOR
A MAN WITH TALENT AND AMBITION.
A MAN LIKE
GALILEO GALILEI.
GALILEO WAS ON THE LOOKOUT
FOR A WAY OF MAKING MONEY.
IN HIS 40'S, A
MATHEMATICIAN WITH
THREE ILLEGITIMATE CHILDREN
HE HAD LIMITED PROSPECTS,
BUT A HUNGER
FOR GREATNESS.
AND IN 1609 HIS
OPPORTUNITY AROSE.
WORD REACHED HIM
OF A NEW DEVICE
WHICH MADE DISTANT
OBJECTS APPEAR CLOSER.
IF HE COULD COPY THE
DEVICE AND MAKE IT BETTER
HE MIGHT BE ABLE
TO MAKE SOME MONEY.
BUT HE'D HAVE
TO ACT QUICKLY.
SVEN DUPRE IS A
HISTORIAN OF SCIENCE.
TODAY HE'S FOLLOWING
IN GALILEO'S FOOTSTEPS
ON A
SHOPPING TRIP.
WE HAVE A LETTER OF GALILEO AND
ON THE BACK OF THAT LETTER
THERE'S JOTTED DOWN
A SHOPPING LIST -
A SHOPPING LIST OF ITEMS
THAT GALILEO HIMSELF
OR ONE OF HIS SERVANTS
WAS SUPPOSED TO BRING BACK
FROM A SHOPPING
TRIP TO VENICE.
VERY ORDINARY ITEMS,
DAILY ITEMS THAT HE NEEDED.
THINGS LIKE PEAS,
ORANGES, SUGAR, PEPPER,
A HAT AND SLIPPERS
FOR HIS SON.
SO FAR SO ORDINARY,
BUT THE LIST CONTINUES.
AND THIS IS WHERE WE FIND
SOME MORE SURPRISING ITEMS
LIKE PIECES OF
FLAT MIRROR GLASS
AND ONE OF THESE,
AN ARTILLERY BALL.
STRANGE AS IT SOUNDS,
THE ARTILLERY BALL
IS A CRUCIAL CLUE.
NOW THIS MAKES US
SUSPECT THAT WHAT GALILEO
WAS ACTUALLY AFTER
WAS TO BUY IN VENICE
- AT THAT TIME ONE OF
THE PREMIER CENTERS
OF GLASSMAKING AND
MIRROR MAKING IN THE WORLD
- TO BUY MIRROR GLASS
TO ACTUALLY GRIND LENSES.
GALILEO WAS MAKING WHAT WOULD
BECOME KNOWN AS A TELESCOPE.
HE SAW THE TELESCOPE AS A
CHANCE TO CHANGE HIS LIFE.
HIS PLAN WAS TO SHOW IT
TO THE RULER OF VENICE
IN THE HOPE HE
WOULD BE REWARDED.
BUT FIRST OF ALL
HE NEEDED GLASS.
THE HOME OF VENETIAN GLASS
MAKING IS THE ISLAND OF MURANO.
AND GALILEO WOULD
HAVE HAD GOOD REASON
TO BUY HIS GLASS
FROM HERE.
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
MURANO GLASS AND OTHER GLASS
IS THAT MURANO GLASS IS MUCH
MORE CLEAR THAN OTHER GLASS
OF THE SAME PERIOD WHICH
OFTEN HAS A GREENISH TINT.
TO MAKE A TELESCOPE LENS YOU
HAD TO START WITH FLAT GLASS.
NOWADAYS IT CAN BE SIMPLY
ROLLED INTO A SHEET,
BUT 400 YEARS AGO
IT WASN'T SO SIMPLE.
WHAT YOU WOULD DO
IS BLOW A GLASS BULB
AND ONCE YOU
HAVE THE GLASS BULB
YOU SHAPE IT
INTO A CYLINDER
BY ROLLING IT
ONTO A FLAT PLATE.
ONCE WE HAVE
THE HOT CYLINDER
WE MAKE CUTS IN IT
SO THAT IT OPENS
AND BY HEATING IT AGAIN TO
ABOUT 700 DEGREES CELSIUS
IT UNFOLDS LIKE
YOU SEE HERE.
THE RESULT IS A
PIECE OF FLAT GLASS.
BUT FINDING THE GLASS
WAS ONLY THE FIRST STEP.
GALILEO HAD TO WORK OUT A WAY
OF TURNING THE RAW MATERIAL
INTO A LENS FIT
FOR HIS TELESCOPE.
HIDDEN IN ANOTHER PART
OF VENICE IS THE WORKSHOP
OF A WORLD RENOWNED
LENS MAKER, ROMANO ZEN.
ROMANO HAS TAKEN SVEN'S
CLEAR PIECE OF GLASS
AND IS SHAPING IT,
READY FOR GRINDING.
AND THIS IS WHERE
THE MYSTERIOUS
ARTILLERY
BALL COMES IN.
TRANSLATOR: THE RIGHT WAY
TO GET A CONCAVE SURFACE
IS TO USE A
CONVEX OBJECT.
BY MAKING HIS
OWN LENSES
GALILEO WAS JOINING
KNOWLEDGE AND REASON
WITH THE PRACTICALITY
OF CRAFTSMANSHIP.
IT'S A TREND THAT'S
IMPORTANT IN WESTERN SCIENCE.
TRANSLATOR: THIS TYPE
OF ABRASION REMOVES
LESS MATERIAL BUT
LEAVES A CLEANER SURFACE.
UNLIKE ROMANO, GALILEO
WASN'T AN EXPERT IN OPTICS.
TO MAKE LENSES WITH
GREATER MAGNIFICATION
HE SIMPLY EXPERIMENTED
WITH THE CURVE OF THE GLASS.
OUT OF A HUNDRED LENSES GALILEO
WAS HAPPY WITH ONLY ONE OR TWO.
BUT WITHIN A FEW WEEKS,
BY TRIAL AND ERROR
HE HAD MADE THE MOST
POWERFUL LENSES IN THE WORLD.
HE PUT THEM TOGETHER IN A
TELESCOPE, TOOK IT UP THE
HIGHEST BELL TOWER IN VENICE,
AND POINTED IT TOWARDS THE SEA.
THROUGH IT, SHIPS THAT WERE 50
KM AWAY LOOKED TEN TIMES CLOSER.
THE RULER OF VENICE
WAS SO IMPRESSED
HE DOUBLED
GALILEO'S SALARY.
IT SEEMED HIS
FORTUNE WAS MADE...
UNTIL HE LIFTED THE
TELESCOPE TO THE HEAVENS.
BY TURNING AWAY FROM THE
SEA AND TOWARDS THE STARS,
GALILEO'S TELESCOPE CREATED
DRAMATIC NEW EVIDENCE...
EVIDENCE IN FAVOR OF A UNIVERSE
WITH THE SUN AT THE CENTER.
AND IN THE HEART OF
THE TUSCAN COUNTRYSIDE
ASTRONOMER FRANCESCO
PALLA HAS BEEN RECREATING
WHAT GALILEO SAW.
TRANSLATOR: THE PROJECT
WAS TO BUILD A REPLICA
OF GALILEO'S
ORIGINAL TELESCOPE.
THE MAIN PART WAS
THE REPRODUCTION
OF THE OPTICAL
SYSTEM, THE LENSES.
THIS OPTICAL SYSTEM
IS VERY SIMPLE.
THERE'S ONE LENS AT ONE END
AND ONE AT THE OTHER END.
DESPITE ITS SIMPLICITY,
GALILEO'S TELESCOPE
WAS A SMALL
TECHNOLOGICAL LEAP
THAT CREATED A GREAT
ADVANCE IN SCIENCE.
THROUGH HIS LENSES HE WAS
ABLE TO SEE THE NIGHT SKY
AS NO ONE HAD
EVER DONE BEFORE.
THIS IS HOW HE SAW THE
SURFACE OF THE MOON.
NIGHT AFTER NIGHT HE
OBSERVED ITS PHASES
AND RECORDED THEM
IN BEAUTIFUL SKETCHES.
BUT IT WAS THE LARGEST
PLANET IN OUR SOLAR SYSTEM
WHICH BROUGHT
DISTURBING NEW EVIDENCE.
WHEN GALILEO LOOKED AT
JUPITER THIS IS WHAT HE SAW.
THERE WERE OBJECTS
HOVERING BESIDE IT.
AT FIRST HE
WAS PUZZLED.
TRANSLATOR: IT'S ONLY
WHEN A FEW DAYS LATER
HE REPEATED OBSERVATIONS
THAT HE SEES THAT
THE POSITION OF THE
OBJECTS HAVE CHANGED.
THEY ARE NOT IN THE SAME
PLACE AS HE RECORDED
IN HIS JOURNAL A
FEW DAYS BEFORE.
THIS IS AN
EPIC MOMENT.
HE MUST HAVE
BURST WITH JOY.
NO ONE HAD SEEN
THESE BRIGHT OBJECTS
EITHER SIDE OF
JUPITER BEFORE.
THEY ARE MOONS
CIRCLING THE PLANET.
THIS WASN'T DEFINITE PROOF
OF A SUN CENTERED COSMOS
BUT IT DID HELP
UNDERMINE THE OLD VIEW.
THESE WERE OBJECTS ORBITING A
PLANET OTHER THAN THE EARTH.
THE NEWS OF GALILEO'S FINDINGS
QUICKLY SPREAD ACROSS EUROPE
AND THAT'S WHEN THE
TROUBLE REALLY STARTED
BECAUSE THE CATHOLIC
CHURCH TOOK NOTICE.
IN 1632 GALILEO TOOK A STEP
WHICH WOULD RUIN HIS LIFE.
HE PUBLISHED HIS THOUGHTS
ON THE NATURE OF THE COSMOS.
THE BOOK IS CALLED
THEDIALOGUE.
PAOLO GALLUZZI HAS SPENT
HIS LIFE STUDYING GALILEO.
FOR HIM AND
MANY OTHERS
THE DIALOGUE IS A
BOOK OF BRILLIANCE.
TRANSLATOR: IF I HAD TO
CHOOSE 20 MAJOR BOOKS
OF ALL TIMES THAT
MUST BE PRESERVED
FROM THE BEGINNING OF HUMAN
TRADITION UP UNTIL TODAY
I WOULD PLACE THE DIALOGUE IN
THIS KIND OF MODERN NOAH'S ARK.
WHAT WAS PARTICULARLY
DANGEROUS ABOUT THE BOOK
WAS THAT IT WAS WRITTEN
FOR A POPULAR AUDIENCE.
TRANSLATOR: THE DIALOGUE
IS QUITE DIFFERENT
FROM THE SCIENTIFIC
WORKS OF ITS TIME.
IT IS EASILY READABLE, IT DOES
NOT INCLUDE MATHEMATICAL
FORMULAE, AND IT IS WRITTEN
IN A VERY LIVELY LANGUAGE.
THE BOOK IS PRESENTED AS
A SERIES OF DISCUSSIONS
ABOUT THE COSMOS.
ONE SIDE ARGUING FOR A
STATIONARY EARTH AT THE CENTER,
THE OTHER
FAVORING THE SUN.
IT GIVES CONSIDERATION
TO BOTH SYSTEMS
BUT GALILEO CLEARLY
COMES DOWN ON THE SIDE
OF THE SUN AS THE HUB
OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM.
THIS WAS A HUGE
CHALLENGE TO THE CHURCH.
GALILEO SEEMED
TO BE QUESTIONING
THE AUTHORITY
OF SCRIPTURE.
TRANSLATOR: GALILEO SAYS THE
BIBLE IS A BOOK DICTATED BY GOD.
NATURE IS A BOOK
CREATED BY GOD.
BOTH HAVE A COMMON ORIGIN
AND HAVE EQUAL AUTHORITY.
GALILEO WAS SUGGESTING THAT
THE CONCLUSIONS OF SCIENCE
WERE JUST AS VALID AS THE
TEACHINGS OF THE CHURCH.
HE HAD GONE TOO FAR AND
WAS SUMMONED TO ROME
TO STAND TRIAL
BEFORE THE INQUISITION.
UNDER THE THREAT
OF TORTURE
HE WAS FORCED TO
RENOUNCE HIS VIEWS.
TRANSLATOR: THE
RENUNCIATION IS A DRAMATIC ACT.
YOU MUST CONFESS NOT TO
BELIEVE IN WHAT YOU BELIEVE.
THIS IS ONE OF THE
WORST ACTS THAT
A MAN WITH INTELLECTUAL
INTEGRITY CAN UNDERGO.
THE DIALOGUE WAS PLACED ON
THE INDEX OF PROHIBITED BOOKS
AND REMAINED THERE
FOR MORE THAN 200 YEARS.
GALILEO WAS PUT
UNDER HOUSE ARREST
IN HIS VILLA
OUTSIDE FLORENCE.
BUT THE ATTEMPTS TO GAG
HIM WERE UTTERLY FUTILE.
WITHIN A GENERATION
THE EDUCATED CLASSES
THROUGHOUT EUROPE HAD
ACCEPTED THE EVIDENCE
THAT THE SUN AND
NOT THE EARTH
WAS AT THE CENTER
OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM.
IT HAPPENED NOW BECAUSE
OF THE CONNECTIONS
BETWEEN THE PATRONAGE
OF RENAISSANCE PRINCES...
A COMBINATION OF
DIFFERENT TALENTS:
TYCHO BRAHE, JOHANNES
KEPLER AND GALILEO...
AND TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION
- RAW DATA FROM TELESCOPES
AND THE POWER OF THE PRINTED
WORD TO SPREAD NEW KNOWLEDGE.
THE STORY OF THE COSMOS
HAD CHANGED FOREVER.
ELSEWHERE IN EUROPE
THERE WAS A NEW FORCE
DRIVING INTEREST IN
THE HEAVENS: TRADE.
AS NEW TRADE
ROUTES OPENED UP
NATIONS FOUGHT
TO RULE THE WAVES.
AND CRUCIAL TO THE BATTLE WAS
NEW ASTRONOMICAL EVIDENCE.
THE ONLY WAY TO NAVIGATE ON THE
OPEN SEAS WAS TO USE THE STARS.
AS VOYAGES BECAME LONGER
AND MORE DANGEROUS
NAVIGATORS NEEDED
NEW TECHNIQUES
AND BETTER ASTRONOMICAL
INSTRUMENTS LIKE THE SEXTANT.
THE LOVE OF THE SEXTANT FOR
ME GOES BACK A LONG LONG WAY.
WHEN I FIRST STARTED IT
WAS A TOOL OF MY TRADE
AND NOW IT'S
BECOME A LOVE.
BUT INSTRUMENTS ALONE
WERE NOT ENOUGH.
TO SAFELY NAVIGATE THE
GLOBE, SAILORS NEEDED
MORE INFORMATION ON THE
POSITIONS OF THE STARS.
THE BETTER THE
STARS WERE CHARTED
THE MORE ACCURATE
THE SAILORS COULD BE.
AND DUE TO THIS THEY NEEDED
TO DRIVE THE ASTRONOMERS MORE
TO PRODUCE MORE TABLES, AND
THE MORE ACCURATE THEY GOT
THE BETTER IT WAS
FOR EVERYBODY.
TO ENSURE THEIR SHIPS HAD
ALL THE DATA THEY NEEDED,
RULERS AND GOVERNMENTS FUNDED
NEWER AND BETTER TELESCOPES.
SO AS THEY WORKED
TO CHART THE PLANET,
THE STARS WERE
CHARTED TOO.
TODAY EVERY STAR IN THE SKY IS
NOW CALCULATED TO THE SECOND.
WE HAVE 57 STARS GIVING
POSITIONS NOW FOR EVERY DAY,
FOR EVERY HOUR, EVERY
MINUTE AND EVERY SECOND
FOR A WHOLE YEAR.
AND THE NEW KNOWLEDGE
CREATED TO HELP WITH NAVIGATION
ALSO FUELED THE QUESTION
"WHAT'S OUT THERE?"
ONE OF THE CARGOS BROUGHT
IN BY TRADE WAS COFFEE.
COFFEE SHOPS SPRUNG
UP ACROSS LONDON.
TRADERS, SHIP'S CAPTAINS,
AND GENTLEMEN MET THERE
TO DO DEALS,
ARGUE, AND DEBATE.
AND AMONGST
THE DISCUSSIONS
WAS THE LATEST
ASTRONOMICAL PROBLEM:
WHAT HOLDS THE
COSMOS TOGETHER?
IN 1684 THIS LED TO A BET
FOR THE SUM OF TWO POUNDS,
ABOUT A
WEEK'S WAGES.
ONE OF THOSE TO TAKE UP THE
CHALLENGE WAS EDMUND HALLEY,
OF HALLEY'S
COMET FAME.
THE BET WAS ABOUT
THE ELLIPTICAL
MOVEMENT OF
THE PLANETS
AND THE MATHEMATICS OF
HOW THEY STAYED IN ORBIT.
EAGER TO FIND
THE SOLUTION,
HALLEY SET OFF IN
SEARCH OF HELP.
HE WENT TO SEE A MAN WHO
WAS AN ALCHEMIST, A RECLUSE,
A MAN WITH NEAR
HERETICAL RELIGIOUS VIEWS.
IT WAS
ISAAC NEWTON.
NEWTON IS A GIANT IN
THE STORY OF SCIENCE.
BY THE TIME HALLEY VISITED
HIM HE'D ALREADY DONE
GROUNDBREAKING WORK IN
OPTICS AND MATHEMATICS.
BUT WHAT NEWTON IS MOST FAMOUS
FOR IS A STORY ABOUT AN APPLE.
EVERYONE KNOWS IT - HOW
NEWTON DISCOVERED GRAVITY
WHEN HE SAW
AN APPLE FALL...
SAT IN THE ORCHARD OF HIS FAMILY
HOME HE HAD A MOMENT OF GENIUS.
HE ASKED "WHY IS IT THE
APPLE ALWAYS FALLS DOWN
AND NOT UP
OR SIDEWAYS?"
EXCEPT IT DIDN'T
HAPPEN LIKE THAT.
NEWTON PROBABLY MADE UP
THE STORY AS AN OLD MAN
TO MAKE SURE HE
ALONE GOT THE CREDIT.
BUT WHAT IS TRUE IS
AFTER HALLEY'S VISIT
NEWTON REALLY BEGAN TO
THINK HOW GRAVITY WORKS.
FOR THE NEXT THREE YEARS,
AS HALLEY SPURRED HIM ON,
NEWTON DEVELOPED
HIS IDEAS.
HE WAS SO OBSESSED HE FORGOT
TO EAT AND OFTEN HARDLY SLEPT.
HIS THEORY OF GRAVITY
SLOWLY TOOK SHAPE.
AND HE APPLIED IT TO THE
MOVEMENTS OF THE HEAVENS.
HE IMAGINED A CANNON
ON A MOUNTAIN
FAR ABOVE THE
ATMOSPHERE.
HE THOUGHT, IF THE BALL
LEAVES THE CANNON SLOWLY,
THEN GRAVITY WILL
PULL IT TO EARTH.
IF IT'S FIRED TOO QUICKLY, IT
WILL DISAPPEAR INTO SPACE.
BUT IF THE SPEED
IS JUST RIGHT,
GRAVITY WILL HOLD
THE BALL IN ORBIT,
ENDLESSLY TRAVELING AROUND
THE EARTH JUST LIKE OUR MOON.
HIS WORK EXPLAINING
HOW GRAVITY
HELD THE UNIVERSE TOGETHER
WAS PUBLISHED IN 1687.
KNOWN AS PRINCIPIA,
OR PRINCIPLES,
IT SET OUT FUNDAMENTAL
AND UNIVERSAL LAWS.
THIS WAS WHEN THE NEW
VISION OF THE UNIVERSE
WAS TRULY EXPLAINED BUILT ON
TYCHO BRAHE'S OBSERVATIONS,
KEPLER'S ELLIPTICAL ORBITS
AND GALILEO'S DISCOVERIES.
NOW NEWTON HAD EXPLAINED
WHY THE PLANETS MOVED.
THE IMPACT OF
NEWTON'S UNIVERSAL LAWS
SPREAD FAR
BEYOND ASTRONOMY.
HE BECAME A HERO
TO REVOLUTIONARIES
WHO DREAMED OF UTOPIAN
SOCIETIES FOUNDED ON REASON.
IN AMERICA, POLITICIANS WERE
INSPIRED BY NEWTON'S LAWS
WHEN THEY SHAPED
THEIR POLITICAL SYSTEM.
AND IN RELIGION, AN
ORDERED UNIVERSE WAS TAKEN
TO DEMONSTRATE THE EXISTENCE
OF A GOD OF INFINITE POWER.
AND AS FOR ASTRONOMY,
THERE WAS NOW A NEW MODEL.
A CLOCKWORK UNIVERSE
GOVERNED BY A FEW SIMPLE LAWS.
AND THAT'S HOW IT STAYED
FOR THE NEXT 200 YEARS.
THE QUESTION OF WHAT'S OUT THERE
HAS ALWAYS FOLLOWED THE MONEY.
AND IN THE EARLY 20TH CENTURY
IT HEADED ACROSS THE ATLANTIC
TO THE HEART OF THE
CALIFORNIAN OIL RUSH.
OIL AND
RAILWAY BARONS,
LIKE RENAISSANCE
PRINCES BEFORE THEM,
FINANCED ANOTHER RADICAL SHIFT
IN THE VIEW OF THE COSMOS.
ONE MAN WHO MADE HIS
FORTUNE WAS JOHN D. HOOKER.
HE WAS PERSUADED
TO GIVE $45,000
TOWARDS THE WORLD'S
LARGEST TELESCOPE.
IT WAS SET ON THE TOP OF MOUNT
WILSON JUST OUTSIDE LOS ANGELES.
IT TOOK TEN YEARS TO
BUILD, IT WEIGHS 100 TONS,
AND IT FLOATS ON
A BED OF MERCURY
COMPENSATING FOR
THE EARTH'S ROTATION.
AND THIS GARGANTUAN
TELESCOPE WAS PARTNERED
WITH A MAN WHO WAS
ALSO LARGER THAN LIFE:
EDWIN HUBBLE, AN ECCENTRIC
BUT TALENTED ASTRONOMER.
AFTER A SPELL AT
OXFORD UNIVERSITY
HE CAME HOME WITH A
FAUX UPPER CLASS ACCENT
AND WORKED IN
JODHPURS AND RIDING BOOTS.
HUBBLE WAS INTERESTED IN THE
OUTER REACHES OF THE MILKY WAY
- AT THAT TIME THE ONLY KNOWN
GALAXY IN THE UNIVERSE.
IT WAS AN INTEREST
THAT WOULD EXPAND
OUR WHOLE NOTION
OF THE COSMOS.
THE HUMAN EYE IS
NOT POWERFUL ENOUGH
TO PICK UP THE NECESSARY
DETAIL ON ITS OWN,
SO THE TELESCOPE IS DESIGNED
TO TAKE PHOTOGRAPHS.
AND ON THE 6TH
OF OCTOBER 1923,
HUBBLE TOOK AN IMAGE
THAT'S BECOME FAMOUS.
THIS IMAGE IS ONE OF THE
MOST SIGNIFICANT IMAGES
EVER TAKEN IN THE ENTIRE
HISTORY OF ASTRONOMY.
THIS IS THE MONA LISA
OF ASTRONOMICAL IMAGES.
THE PHOTOGRAPH IS OF
THE ANDROMEDA NEBULA,
A SWIRLING CLOUD-LIKE
AREA IN THE NIGHT SKY.
BUT TAKEN WITH A
TELESCOPE OF THIS SIZE,
THE PHOTO REVEALED A
VERY SPECIAL DETAIL.
WHAT'S REMARKABLE
ABOUT THIS IMAGE
IS IN THE UPPER
RIGHT HAND CORNER.
THERE'S A NOTATION THAT
EDWIN HUBBLE PUT HERE:
"VAR" FOR VARIABLE STAR, WITH
AN EXCLAMATION POINT AFTER IT.
THIS WAS A
HUGE DISCOVERY.
THE PASSING OF A VARIABLE
STAR COULD BE USED
TO CALCULATE ITS
DISTANCE FROM THE EARTH.
AND THE RESULT
WAS ASTONISHING.
WHEN HUBBLE AND
HIS COLLEAGUES
DID THE CALCULATION
THEY DETERMINED THAT
THIS OBJECT WAS ACTUALLY
OUTSIDE THE BOUNDS
OF THE MILKY WAY GALAXY,
SHATTERING OUR IDEA
THAT OUR GALAXY WAS THE
ENTIRE UNIVERSE ITSELF.
THE NEBULA WAS IN
FACT ANOTHER GALAXY.
WE WERE NO LONGER
UNIQUE IN THE UNIVERSE.
WE WERE JUST ONE
PLANET IN ONE GALAXY
AMONGST BILLIONS
OF OTHERS.
OUR RACE, OUR WORLD,
AND ALL OUR CONCERNS
WERE COSMICALLY
INSIGNIFICANT.
BUT THAT WAS
JUST THE START.
AS HUBBLE AND HIS COLLEAGUES
CONTINUED TO SEARCH THE SKY,
THEY MEASURED THE SPEED AT
WHICH GALAXIES WERE MOVING
EITHER TOWARDS
OR AWAY FROM US.
THE VAST MAJORITY WERE
ACTUALLY RECEDING
AND OFTEN AT MIND
BLOWING SPEEDS.
THE IMPLICATION WAS THAT
THE UNIVERSE WAS EXPANDING.
OUR UNIVERSE
HAD A BEGINNING
13 BILLION
YEARS AGO...
IT'S KNOWN AS
"THE BIG BANG".
EDWIN HUBBLE AT THE
TIME NEVER RECEIVED
THE RECOGNITION
HE CRAVED
FOR HIS DISCOVERY OF THE
VASTNESS OF THE COSMOS.
BUT FLOATING
HIGH ABOVE EARTH
IS THE ULTIMATE TRIBUTE
TO THIS ECCENTRIC MAN:
THE HUBBLE
SPACE TELESCOPE.
400 YEARS SINCE GALILEO
GROUND HIS FIRST LENSES,
THIS IS WHAT WE NOW USE
TO SEE WHAT'S OUT THERE.
IT CAN PEER BILLIONS OF LIGHT
YEARS ACROSS THE UNIVERSE,
BACK IN TIME, TOWARDS THE
BIRTH OF EVERYTHING IN IT.
OUR JOURNEY TO FIND
OUT WHAT'S OUT THERE
HAS BEEN SHAPED BY
POWERFUL FORCES AND BELIEFS,
BY THE GREEK OBSESSION
WITH DIVINE CIRCLES,
BY THE COURTS OF
THE RENAISSANCE,
AND BY RELIGIOUS
UPHEAVAL.
ABOVE ALL BY THE
MARRIAGE OF TWO SKILLS:
THE PRACTICAL MAKERS
OF INSTRUMENTS
AND THE
GREAT THINKERS.
AND IT'S STILL GOING ON
WITH NEW TECHNOLOGY
CREATING MORE
POWERFUL WAYS
OF LOOKING DEEP
INTO THE COSMOS.
SO WHAT IS
OUT THERE?
THE DEEPER AND
FURTHER WE LOOK
THE STRANGER
IT BECOMES
AND THE MORE
WONDROUS IT SEEMS.
WE'VE SEEN THE BIRTH OF STARS
IN NURSERIES OF GAS AND DUST,
EVIDENCE OF
SUPERMASSIVE BLACK HOLES,
AND CLUES TO
DARK ENERGY
THAT MAY MAKE UP
MOST OF OUR UNIVERSE.
THESE IDEAS ARE AS
UNSETTLING TO US
AS THE EARTH GOING AROUND
THE SUN WAS TO OUR ANCESTORS.
BUT OUR 2,000 YEAR JOURNEY
THROUGH ASTRONOMY
HAS CHANGED US.
NO MATTER HOW STRANGE
THE CONCLUSIONS MAY SEEM,
BY ACCEPTING
EVIDENCE
WE'VE COME TO UNDERSTAND
NOT JUST THE UNIVERSE
BUT OUR PLACE
HERE WITHIN IT.